Space Story 1080. 4 minutes 30 seconds coming in 3, 2, 1. From NASA's Goddard
Space Flight Center, a look at the orbital gymnastics of an old spacecraft.
This is the Space Story, a weekly space and aeronautics report brought to you by
this station and NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
In one of the most complex orbital maneuvers ever undertaken by a spacecraft,
NASA's International Sun-Earth Explorer, or IC3, moved in a series of looping
trajectories going to three different targets in almost four years. Originally
launched to study the charged particles coming from the sun, IC was then
rerouted to conduct an exploratory survey of the Earth's distant magnetic tail,
a region in space never explored before. The man behind IC's complex space
navigation is Dr. Robert Farquhar from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center. This
is really known as an acrobatic satellite because very seldom have we had one
that we can move all over near space by using the gravity field of the moon to
bend the orbit and to send it out further and bring it in closer. You can do
almost anything you want by using the gravity field of the moon and the
propulsive capability of the spacecraft. The spacecraft, which has been renamed
International Cometary Explorer, is now on its way to intercept a comet called
Giacobini Zinner, It will be the first time a man-made object intercepts the
comet. We passed within 120 kilometers of the surface of the moon, and the moon
acted like a slingshot and hurled the spacecraft out towards the comet. And we
will reach the comet on September 11, 1985. This is about six months before all
the other spacecraft from the Soviet Union, from the European Space Agency, from
the Japanese Space Agency, will be going through Halley's comet, so that in fact
the United States will be the first nation to send a spacecraft to a comet. We
asked Dr. Farquhar if the dust coming out of Comet Jacobini-Zinner could in any
way impact the spacecraft. We do have to worry about that going through Jacobini
-Zinner, though it also has a dust problem, and dust will be impacting the
spacecraft at about 20 km per second and could do a lot of damage before we get
all of our measurements. Our present models show that this should not be a
problem, but one never knows because nobody has ever been to a comet before Some
of the things that could happen is that a dust particle could penetrate the
spacecraft and destroy our communications system, or some other critical
instrument on the spacecraft Well, I think we already got our money's worth from
this mission because we already done two missions prior to the comet mission And
so, I think we already got the value out of the spacecraft But the other thing
is, even if it's destroyed as it passes through the comet, we expect to get data
about halfway through anyway, and that's still going to be very valuable. If all
goes as planned, the spacecraft will be in the area of the solar wind between
Halley's comet and the sun in early 1986. Intercepting Giacobini-Zinner and
studying comet Halley will allow scientists to make comparative studies between
the two. Comets are believed to be among the most primitive bodies in space.
Scientists believe they can trace the International Cometary Explorer for many
years after its cometary encounter. One of the novelties of the orbit that we're
in going out to the comet is that the orbital period is kind of synchronized
with the Earth's orbital period. And 30 years after we had left the Earth, which
is 1983, we'll be coming back close to the Earth again. This is the year 2013.
And at that time, we planned on using the moon's gravity once again to recapture
the spacecraft and put it into an Earth orbit, and then probably transfer it
into a lunar transfer orbit where the spacecraft could be picked up by an
advanced shuttle spacecraft. And people can look at it in the Air and Space
Museum. It cost less than $5 million dollars to reuse this old spacecraft while
it would've required two additional spacecraft at an approximate cost of $100
million each to perform the same job.
This has been The Space Story, a weekly space and aeronautics report brought to
you by this station and NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
space story 1081 four minutes thirty seconds coming in 3 two one one of the
areas that stand to benefit most from spaceflight is the ability to make
scientific observations of the Earth from space on the next space shuttle
mission scheduled for October the orbiter will become an earth observatory and
the astronauts will be gathering geologic geographic and oceanographic
information about our planet. One of the crew members on this mission is
astronaut Kathy Sullivan. Starting off on the very first day of the flight we're
going to launch an earth radiation budget satellite that we call ERBS. It's a
NASA project that has a variety of scientific instruments aboard that are
designed to look at the radiation balance of the earth and hopefully provide
some information in concert with other weather satellites that will help us get
a better understanding of what drives the world's climates. We have also another
set of science experiments that includes a side-looking radar and an imaging
experiment to identify features on the ground and an atmospheric pollution
experiment. I've been the lead crew member on that group of experiments called
OST-3. And all the way in the back of the cargo bay on another rack we'll have a
large format camera that will take very high resolution pictures of the Earth's
surface on 9 inch by 18 inch frames of film. One of the most interesting
experiments on board is the shuttle imaging radar. First flown in the second
space shuttle mission, the improved larger radar antenna will obtain data in
digital form so it can be run through computers and bring out more subtle
detail. About 115 investigators throughout the world are studying the data we
will get back with the radar. When we flew an imaging radar on the second
shuttle flight, we called it SUR-A, we learned a lot about how stable and how
suitable the orbiter is as a platform for an imaging radar. Probably the most
startling thing that was discovered on the terrain that Sur A looked at was in
the southern portions of Egypt and the eastern areas of Libya. And it was
discovered there in some of the great sand seas of the northeastern Sahara that
the couple of top meters of sand, six to ten feet or so, were so extremely dry
and porous that the radar beams actually could penetrate that layer and would
then reflect off of a surface beneath the sand sheet. So what would look to your
eye as a just trackless sand sheet if you flew over or were driving across it,
to the radar's eye, it turned out to be an old, about 60,000-year-old river
system complete with valleys and channels and gravels and sandbars that had just
accidentally almost been covered by a sheet of dune sand. This has turned out to
tell everybody quite a lot about the earlier climate and the earlier water flow
patterns in that region. And archaeologically, it's also turned up a lot of
interesting detail about former civilizations in that part of Africa. Some of
the very dry areas of Egypt that we looked at with Sur A are again candidates to
be looked at with Sur B and see what more detail we might discover with the
better equipment. And since we really had never understood before Sur-A that
that kind of mapping through the surface was possible, we've looked very
carefully on the Sur-B sites for other areas of the world that might be that dry
and might have a transparent surface layer beneath which we could see evidence
of former rivers or perhaps learn more things about old climates and older
civilizations. On this mission, Kathy Sullivan will become the first woman to
conduct an extravehicular activity, or spacewalk, Together with crew member Dave
Leestma, she will be demonstrating the capability of refueling satellites in
space. We asked her what this mission means to her personally. The idea of my
being an astronaut came along as I was finishing graduate school and recognized
that the kind of expeditionary research that I had enjoyed very much doing at
sea and on land as a geologist was also being done in space, and with the advent
of the shuttle, there was even a niche, a role in space, for someone with the
kind of broad scientific and technical background that I had. I can't fully
appreciate sitting here on the ground how amazing and beautiful I expect the
Earth to be from that perspective.
This has been The Space Story, a weekly space and aeronautics report brought to
you by this station and NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Space Story 1082 4 minutes 30 seconds coming in 3 2 1 This is the Space Story a
weekly space and aeronautics report brought to you by this station and NASA the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
For many years, astronomers learned about the universe by looking at it in the
narrow part of the electromagnetic spectrum called visible light. Later they
discovered that stars send out kinds of energy that we cannot see, such as
infrared and ultraviolet radiation, radio waves, x-rays, and gamma rays. Each
part of the spectrum has its own contributions to make to our understanding of
the universe. The Gamma Ray Observatory, scheduled to be launched by the Space
Shuttle in 1988, will be a powerful tool for understanding some of the most
fascinating objects in space. Pulsars, quasars, active galaxies, and black
holes. Dr. Donald Kniffen is Project Scientist for the Gamma Ray Observatory at
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center. Whenever one of these violent events takes
place in the universe, a supernova explosion or a black hole or a pulsar, lots
of very, very energetic processes take place. And because gamma rays are such
high energy, that means in these processes, in these interactions which occur,
then a lot of energy is available to go into things like gamma rays. Now, the
way that we learn about any object, viewing it through astronomy, You have to
deduce what's going on in the vicinity of the place where the gamma rays are
being produced by the things that you can see. Gamma rays, like any other
photon, travel directly from the source to us so we can make a good guess as to
what object they're coming from. But what we want to learn about by observing
the gamma rays is what mechanism is occurring. This then tells us about the
physics that's going on in the source and hence what sort of types of violent
reactions are taking place. And from this then we can learn about things like
the evolution of our universe. We can learn about the actual details of the
supernova process where very heavy elements are believed to be formed. Dr. David
Thompson, also from the Goddard Space Flight Center, explain some of the
contributions the Gamma Ray Observatory can make. The observatory will help us
understand pulsars. Pulsars were first discovered by radio astronomers, and it
is now thought that a pulsar is a rapidly rotating remnant of a star that once
lived. When that star died in a supernova explosion, it left behind a tiny core
of material, extremely dense material. If you had a sugar cube made out of
neutron star material, it would weigh about 300 million tons on the surface of
the Earth, a sugar cube. So this is what a neutron star is like. These neutron
stars are spinning. And as they spin, they put out pulses of radio emission. And
some of these are now known to put out pulses of gamma ray emission. Those that
we have studied indicate that even though there are lots more radio waves seen
from these, most of the energy that we see coming out of a pulsar is actually in
the form of gamma rays. And that means that by studying the gamma rays, we learn
something about what it's like around a neutron star, a place that's so exotic
and foreign that we can't even picture it on Earth. Quasars also emit tremendous
amounts of energy in the form of gamma rays. Quasars have always been considered
exotic because they appear to be moving away from us at a large fraction of the
speed of light, which may indicate that they are somewhere and they are very
distant parts of the universe. And yet the fact that we can see them indicates
that they are radiating tremendous amounts of energy and may indeed be powered
by black holes. If you want to see what's going on near a black hole, you have
to get out something that involves a large amount of energy, and that's a gamma
ray.
This has been the Space Story, a weekly space and aeronautics report brought to
you by this station and NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Space Story 1,083. 4 minutes 30 seconds. Coming in three, two, one. This is the
Space Story. A weekly space and aeronautics report brought to you by this
station and NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Recent events, such as the 1982 and 83 disastrous El Nino current, which caused
billions of dollars in damage and considerable loss of life, have demonstrated
the need to better understand the workings of the ocean and its effects on our
climate. In the past, satellites have been the key to global measurements of the
ocean. One of the instruments on NASA's 1979 CSAT satellite made as many
individual measurements of wind speed and direction as were collected during the
previous century of shipboard observations. NASA has invited an oceanographer to
fly on the next space shuttle mission. Australian-born Paul Scully Power will be
performing three major functions during this flight. The first is to test the
hypothesis, if you will, that a trained oceanographer up there can see more than
an astronaut who's highly trained but not in that particular field. And the
second thing is going to be that in recent flights, the astronauts have made
some significant new discoveries in oceanography from their flights. For
example, they have discovered a new type of ocean eddy which has a spiral
structure, most of the ocean eddies that you find in the scientific literature
all sort of, the currents are circular. In these new type of eddies were found
the currents are in fact spiral. And so there's a recent discovery made by the
astronaut crews. And so my second objective is to go look at these new
discoveries that they've seen and try and interpret that. And the third major
objective is that on this particular flight, it's an Earth Sciences Mission, and
specifically they're going to have a synthetic aperture radar looking at the
solid Earth and on the oceans. And so I will probably be taking photographs
simultaneously with the radar of the ocean sites that the radar is capturing on
the radar imaging system. I will be in fact capturing those same sites in colour
photography. Both world weather and long term climate changes are strongly
linked to ocean behaviour. The weather we've had in the last 18 months has been
tied now directly to the North Pacific in terms of anomalous temperature, so
it's very obvious and there's a time lag too. The weather patterns that we've
seen have been triggered by temperature anomalies in the ocean which occurred
six months previously to that. so there's a time lag. So obviously, if you're
going to be able to do long-term weather prediction you've got to understand the
ocean. And that really makes a lot of sense, and I think everyone's in general
agreement with that because if you think of the ocean as a sort of big heat
reservoir, it's like a big heat engine that drives the atmosphere. So what
happens in the atmosphere is in fact driven by the ocean, and not the other way
around. Okay, so therefore oceanography is important. Then in the last two or
three years there's been some theoretical work in oceanography that says if
you're ever going to understand the ocean dynamics you have to focus on what is
called the Mese scale, what that translates to is mid scale and that really is
you know events that have size, if you will, of tens to hundreds of miles, okay.
For example ocean eddies, and the more we learn about oceanography the more
we're finding that there's more and more eddies in the ocean. They have
diameters of anywhere say between 70 and 150 miles. So it's right in that mid
scale. Now it turns out that from low earth orbit on the shuttle the natural
field of view of the human eye or camera system is that scale. So obviously the
correct vantage point to see the whole pattern at that scale is from low earth
orbit. And so that's one of the rationales as to why I'm due to fly on the
shuttle to take advantage of that particular viewing mode. And so you see the
connectivity then from what I'm seeing to the mid-sized patterns in the ocean
which drives the total ocean dynamics, which drives the atmosphere. And so we
can predict the long-term weather prediction. So it really is all tied together.
This has been the Space Story, a weekly space and aeronautics report brought to
you by this station and NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
[Beeping.]